\chapter{Publishing Your App}\label{publishing-your-app}

As you develop apps, you may want to sell them to or share them with
consumers. You can distribute your apps on the
\href{http://marketplace.liferay.com}{Liferay Marketplace}. The process
is straightforward, but must make some decisions along the way and
prepare your app for publishing on the Marketplace.

This section's first tutorial explains Liferay Marketplace-related
concepts and informs you of decisions to make before starting the
publishing process from your portal. Then you'll learn how to get
resources, such as your app's icon, screenshots to show off your app,
and a comprehensive description of your app, ready for the publishing
process. After that, you'll learn the step-by-step process of submitting
your app to the Marketplace. Lastly, you'll learn how to monitor your
app's success on Liferay Marketplace and modify or add new versions of
your app to the Marketplace.

\chapter{Planning Your App's
Distribution}\label{planning-your-apps-distribution}

When you start the formal process of submitting your app to the
Marketplace, in addition to uploading your app's files you must answer a
host of important questions. For example, you must clarify who owns the
app, specify pricing for the app, define its licensing scheme (if it's a
paid app), associate a person or company as its owner and maintainer,
and specify the versions of Liferay that the app supports. Your answers
to these questions help you determine if you must package multiple
versions of the app. This tutorial prepares you by explaining the
questions and ways you might answer them. Here's what's covered:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/selling-your-app-or-making-it-free}{Selling
  your app or making it free}
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/publishing-as-an-individual-or-on-behalf-of-a-company}{Publishing
  as an individual or on behalf of a company}
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/licensing-and-pricing-your-app}{Licensing
  and pricing your app}
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/targeting-liferay-editions-and-versions}{App
  versioning and target Liferay editions and versions}
\end{itemize}

The first tutorial answers this question: Should I sell my app or make
it free?

\section{Selling Your App or Making it
Free}\label{selling-your-app-or-making-it-free}

Do you want to sell your app on the Marketplace? Or do you want to share
it freely with anyone on the Marketplace? It's up to you. Most of the
content that follows describes options for paid apps (apps you sell).

If you're selling your app, you must publish using a \emph{Paid App
Account}. You must also specify licensing, a price structure, and
regional availability for your paid apps.

Importantly, you can't change the app from free to paid or from paid to
free once the app is published to the Marketplace. Offering the app in
in both license types requires submitting another app under a different
name (title). If you want both free and paid licenses for your app, you
must submit the app under one name for free licenses and under another
name for paid licenses. Make sure you select the license type (i.e.,
free or paid) that's best for your app.

Have you decided who to list as the app's author/owner? Have you decided
manages the app once it's on the Marketplace? App ownership options are
explained next.

\section{Publishing as an Individual or on Behalf of a
Company}\label{publishing-as-an-individual-or-on-behalf-of-a-company}

You can publish an app as yourself (an individual) or on behalf of a
\emph{company}. This determines who is shown as the app's author and
owner. Your selection also determines who can access the app behind the
scenes, once it's published.

The default option is publishing on behalf of yourself. If you go with
this option, your name shows as the app's author/owner in the
Marketplace. The term \emph{personal app} refers to an app published by
an individual. That individual is the only one who can manage the
personal app. Managing an app includes such duties as adding new
releases to it, adding new versions of it, and editing its details.

Publishing on behalf of a company effectively hands the keys over to the
company's administrators. The app shows on the company's Marketplace app
development page and in the company's list of apps on the company's
public profile page. Company admins have the same permission that an
individual author has to manage the app (add new releases, new versions,
edit details, etc.). The company's name alone is shown as the app's
author/owner.

You can
\href{https://www.liferay.com/marketplace/become-a-developer}{register}
yourself as a Marketplace Developer or one of your company's
administrators can register the company as a Marketplace Developer. You
can either register for a Free Basic Account or register for a Paid App
Developer Account. A Paid App Developer Account lets you submit paid
apps to the Liferay Marketplace for sale to customers globally. It
enables you to monetize the benefits of the Marketplace and the benefits
of the Liferay distribution channel. The best part is, you can upgrade
to a Paid App Developer Account if and when you want to submit a paid
app to the Marketplace! Here's a comparison of the Marketplace developer
account options:

Free Basic Account

No cost to register as a Marketplace developer

Distribute free apps on the Marketplace

Access to developer-only resources (e.g., Liferay Dev Studio, Liferay
Developer License)

Participate in Marketplace promotions

Converting from Basic-to-Paid

When you're ready to submit a paid app to the Marketplace:

Agree to the Developer Agreement

Pay \$99 annual fee

Submit relevant tax documents (eg., W-9, W-8BEN) to receive payments

Enter PayPal info to receive payments (PayPal account must be a Verified
Business Account)

Paid App Developer Account

Upgrade when you're ready: only pay annual fee at time of paid app
submission

Offer paid licensing/support for your apps

Receive 80\% of app sales proceeds

Access to detailed transaction history

Paid apps customer management

All the benefits of a Basic Developer Account

Now that you've determined your app's owner and you've registered an
account to manage the app, you can learn about licensing options for
paid apps.

\section{Licensing and Pricing Your
App}\label{licensing-and-pricing-your-app}

You have significant control over how to price your app. You choose the
license term (perpetual vs.~annual), choose the license type (standard
vs.~developer), define a pricing structure (pricing and bundled
discounting based on a license unit), and specify regional availability.
Even after your app is on the Marketplace, you can tweak general pricing
or modify regional pricing. Here you'll learn how to do all these
things.

\subsection{Determining a License
Term}\label{determining-a-license-term}

Here are the license term options:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Perpetual license: does not expire.
\item
  Non-perpetual license: must be renewed annually.
\end{itemize}

Importantly, you can't change your app's license terms once the app is
approved. Releasing an approved app under a different license term
requires submitting another app under a new name (title). So make sure
to think through the license term that makes the most sense for your
app.

\noindent\hrulefill

\textbf{Note:} If you are a foreign developer based outside of the
United States, non-perpetual license sales (considered to be royalty
income) to US customers are subject to a 30\% withholding tax. This tax
does not apply to perpetual licenses. For more information on licensing
terms and fees, please refer to the \href{/faq}{FAQ}.

\noindent\hrulefill

\subsection{Determining License Type and License Unit
Pricing}\label{determining-license-type-and-license-unit-pricing}

Licenses are set to run on a permitted number of Instance Units (defined
as a single installation of the Liferay, which corresponds to one (1)
Liferay \texttt{.war} file). You can create tiers of bundled options to
accommodate the number of Instance Units to offer to customers. You can
also offer a discounted price for a bundle of multiple Instance Units.

There are two types of licenses that you can offer for your app:
standard licenses and developer licenses. Standard licenses are intended
for production server environments. Developer licenses are limited to 10
unique IP addresses and, therefore, should not be used for full-scale
production deployments.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/licenseview.png}
\caption{Liferay Marketplace lets you specify different types of
licenses and license quantities for pricing.}
\end{figure}

You can also offer subscription services or 30-day trials. Support,
maintenance, and updates should comprise subscription services.

Depending on how you decide to license your app, you have a few options
to consider with regard to subscription services:

\textbf{If you're offering a perpetual license\ldots{}}

You can offer annually renewable subscription services. During the app
submission process if you choose to \emph{offer subscription services},
you're asked to price subscription services on a \emph{per Instance Unit
per year} basis. The first year of subscription services is included
with a perpetual license. If a customer wants to continue receiving
services after the first year, the customer must renew subscription
services at the price you designate. Customers are entitled to support,
maintenance, and updates as long as they continue to annually renew
subscription services.

If you choose not to offer subscription services, customers are entitled
to only app updates, if and when updates become available. This type of
one-time, upfront payment model may work well for less complex apps and
themes/templates.

\textbf{If you're offering a non-perpetual (annual/renewable)
license\ldots{}}

You can offer annually renewable subscription services. During the app
submission process if you choose to \emph{offer subscription services},
you should build the price of subscription services into the annual
price of the non-perpetual license; please take this into account as you
price non-perpetual licenses. In effect, the customer pays one price
annually for both the app license and subscription services. The
customer is entitled to support, maintenance, and updates as long as
they continue to renew their non-perpetual license.

If you choose not to offer subscription services, customers are entitled
to only app updates if and when updates become available. They can
receive updates as long as they continue to have valid non-perpetual
licenses.

\subsection{Setting Prices for License Options by
Region}\label{setting-prices-for-license-options-by-region}

You can specify countries your app will be available in and the app's
price in in each of those countries. You can make it as simple (single
price offered globally) or as granular (different price in each country
offered) as you want.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/pricing_screenshot.png}
\caption{Liferay Marketplace lets you specify prices for all of your
license options and lets you specify them by region.}
\end{figure}

Choose the currency to use with your pricing options. Decide on the
renewal cost for any support services you offer. The support services
price is per instance, so if you specify \$100 USD and the customer is
running 10 instances, their annual support services renewal cost will be
\$1000. Note: This only applies to perpetual licenses. For non-perpetual
licenses, include any support services cost in the annual license price.

Even after an app has been approved, you can change the currency type
and currency price of its license bundles, and you can modify regional
availability of license bundles.

Although Liferay Marketplace supports major currencies and a broad list
of countries, not all currencies and countries are currently available.
Additional currencies and countries may become available at a later
time.

\subsection{Considering the Liferay Marketplace
Fee}\label{considering-the-liferay-marketplace-fee}

By selling your paid apps on the Liferay Marketplace, you're agreeing to
share app sales revenue with Liferay. For each app sale, you receive
80\% of the sales proceeds and Liferay receives 20\% of the sales
proceeds. We believe this type of fee structure is extremely competitive
compared to other app marketplaces. Liferay uses its share of app sale
proceeds to:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Operate and improve the Liferay Marketplace.
\item
  Provide developer services, such as payment processing, license
  tracking, and performance metrics.
\item
  Continue investing in and growing the Liferay ecosystem.
\end{itemize}

\textbf{Comparison of Liferay's App Revenue Sharing with that of Other
App Marketplaces}

Share to Developer

Liferay Marketplace

80\%

Atlassian Marketplace

75\%

DNN Store

75\%

Concrete 5

75\%

Apple App Store

70\%

As you can see, Liferay's fee is reasonable.

You need a valid PayPal account to receive payment; you're asked to
provide this info when registering for or converting to a Paid App
Developer Account. Payments are issued no later than 90 days after the
transaction.

Now that you've decided on licensing options and pricing, you can
concentrate on the Liferay versions your app runs on.

\section{Targeting Liferay Editions and Versions and Versioning your
App}\label{targeting-liferay-editions-and-versions-and-versioning-your-app}

There are multiple versions of Liferay and multiple editions (e.g.,
community and enterprise) for each version. You must decide the versions
and editions to build your app on. And lastly, you must decide how to
version your app. This tutorial covers these topics.

\subsection{Determining Editions and Versions of Liferay to
Target}\label{determining-editions-and-versions-of-liferay-to-target}

Of course, targeting the widest possible range of Liferay editions and
versions in an app typically draws larger audiences to the app. And
there may be certain features in these editions and versions that you
want to take advantage of. In your app's plugin
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/preparing-your-app}{packaging
properties}, specify packaging directives to indicate the editions the
app supports and the version that the app supports. To ensure the widest
audience for your app, make your app compatible with both Liferay
Digital Experience Platform (DXP) and Liferay Portal Community Edition
(CE).

You can prepare a set of app files (including its
\texttt{liferay-plugin-package.properties} file) for each version of
Liferay you want to support. When uploading your app, you can specify
which versions of Liferay your app is compatible with and you can
appropriately upload the sets of app files that are designed for those
different versions. The next article in this guide explains how to go
about
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/preparing-your-app}{specifying
packaging directives}.

Note that apps on Liferay Marketplace must be designed for Liferay
Portal 6.1 GA3 or later. That doesn't mean they can't work with prior
versions. However, only Liferay Portal 6.1 GA3 and later versions
support installing apps directly from Marketplace and provide safeguards
against malicious apps. If you want to use an app with an earlier
version of Liferay DXP, make sure that version provides the dependencies
your app needs.

Lastly, you should determine a versioning scheme for your app. How will
you refer to the first version of your app, the second version, and so
on.

\subsection{Decide on a Versioning
Scheme}\label{decide-on-a-versioning-scheme}

A version of an app represents the functionality of the app at a given
point in time. When you first create an app, you give it an initial
version (e.g., \texttt{1.0}). On updating the app, you increment its
version (e.g., from \texttt{1.0} to \texttt{1.1}), and you upload new
files representing that version of the app. In some cases, you specify
additional qualifiers in order to convey a special meaning. For example,
you may declare that the version of your app is always in x.y.z format
(where you've clearly defined the significance of x, y, and z). Liferay
versions and official Liferay app versions use this format.

In any case, you're free to assign your app's version designators any
way you like. We recommend that you stick to a well known and easily
understandable format, such as \texttt{1.0}, \texttt{1.1}, \texttt{1.2},
and so on. Although you may want to include alphabetical characters
(e.g., \texttt{1.0\ Beta\ 2} or \texttt{6.3\ Patch\ 123235-01}), we
discourage it, as such characters may confuse customers as to how your
app's versions relate to one another.

Keep in mind that the releases of Liferay with which your app works must
be specified using Liferay's versioning scheme, as explained in
\href{/docs/7-2/deploy/-/knowledge_base/d/understanding-liferays-releases}{Understanding
Liferay's Releases}. See the later section \emph{Specify App Packaging
Directives} for details on specifying the releases of Liferay for which
your app is designed.

Congratulations on coming up with a sound game plan for your app! The
next articles explain how to prepare apps for publishing.

\chapter{Preparing Your App}\label{preparing-your-app}

As a Liferay developer, you're undoubtedly already familiar with the
concept of plugins (portlets, themes, etc.). If you're not familiar with
Liferay plugins, see \href{/docs/7-2/appdev}{Introduction to Liferay
Development}. A \emph{Liferay App} (sometimes just called an \emph{app})
is a collection of one or more of these plugins, packaged together to
represent the full functionality of an application on the Liferay
platform. In addition to the plugins contained within an app, apps have
metadata such as names, descriptions, versions, and other information
that describe and track the app throughout its life cycle.

Much like standard Liferay plugins, Liferay apps are also
auto-deployable. Liferay Marketplace apps are distributed via a special
file type with an \texttt{.lpkg} extension. To deploy these files, drop
them into a running Liferay instance's auto-deploy folder
(\texttt{{[}Liferay\_Home{]}/deploy}), like any other plugin.

As an app developer, you're not required to create the \texttt{.lpkg}
files. Instead, your app's individual plugins (WAR files for traditional
plugins or JAR files for OSGi modules) are uploaded as part of the
publication process, along with information (name, description, version,
icon, etc.) that identifies the app. The publication process is
described in detail later.

At this point in preparing to publish your app, you've developed your
app. But before you start the formal publishing process, you must
prepare your app's files and app metadata.

\section{Marketplace App Metadata
Guidelines}\label{marketplace-app-metadata-guidelines}

The following app metadata guidelines ensure that apps are submitted
with important and necessary supporting information. The metadata that
you submit with your app serves both as necessary information for your
app's buyers (e.g., your contact info) and as promotional assets (e.g.,
description, screenshots, etc.) that can help drive traffic to and
downloads of your app!

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/dev-portal-app-metadata-guidelines.png}
\caption{Check out how good your app can look on the Marketplace.}
\end{figure}

Think of a good name and description for your app. If you haven't
already done so, take some screenshots, design an icon, and create a
website for your app. The table below helps you address the Marketplace
app metadata requirements and produce an appealing app advertisement.

\textbf{Marketplace App Metadata Guidelines:}

Required Metadata

Description

App Name

This is probably the most important branding element of your app, so be
creative! Some important things to keep in mind:

In some views within the Marketplace, app titles longer than 18
characters are shortened with an ellipsis.

Titles must not be longer than 50 characters.

App title may contain the word ``Liferay'' to describe its use or intent
as long as the name does not imply official certification or validation
from Liferay, Inc. (For example, names such as ``Exchange Connector for
Liferay'' or ``Integration Connector Kit for Liferay'' would be allowed,
while ``Liferay Mail Portlet,'' ``Liferay Management Console,'' or
``Liferay UI Kit'' would not be permissible without explicit approval).
Please refer to our trademark policy for details.

Please try to conform the app name as closely as possible to the actual
plugin (portlet, module, theme, etc.) name.

Support Information

Please include an email address, contact information, and/or website URL
for the ``Support'' field. If there's an issue with your app, they
should be a way to contact you.

If you choose not to offer Support Services (by unchecking ``Offer
Support'' during the app submission process), you must provide support
contact information so that buyers can ask you general questions about
your app.

Description

Using English as the default language, you must provide a description
for your app. After providing the description in English, you can
provide other translations of the text.

At a minimum, the description should provide a concise overview of what
the app does. Great descriptions also list key functionality and what
customers can expect to gain by deploying your app. For a good
description example, see the Audience Targeting app on the Marketplace.

Specify any plugin dependencies (plugins that must be installed prior to
running your app) and environment compatibilities (compatibility with
specific app servers) here, so that potential buyers and the Liferay app
review team are aware of these requirements.

What's New?*

Using English as the default language, describe what's new and improved
in your app. After this, you can provide other translations of the text.
This field is shown on updating an app that you've already submitted,
regardless of whether the app has been published.

Compatibility with Future Minor Releases of Liferay

Please include a ``+'' at the end of the latest version when specifying
version constraints in your liferay-plugin-package.properties file
(e.g., ``liferay-versions=7.2.1+, 7.2.20+''). This ensures that the app
continues to be deployable to future Liferay DXP versions within a minor
release. If, in the future, you discover your app does NOT work with a
particular version, you can modify the list to exclude that version.

Increase Your Potential User Base

In most cases, an app compatible with Liferay Portal CE also runs on
Liferay Digital Experience Platform (DXP) (or Liferay Portal EE), and
vice versa. Specifying compatibility with both DXP/EE and CE versions of
Liferay ensures a wider audience for your app!

You can request a Developer License to support testing and confirm
compatibility.

Icon

App icons must be exactly 90 pixels in both height and width in PNG,
JPG, or GIF format. The image size cannot exceed 512kb. Animated images
are prohibited.

The use of the Liferay logo, including alternate versions of the Liferay
logo, is permitted only with Liferay's explicit approval. Please refer
to our trademark policy for details.

Screenshots

App screenshots must not exceed 1080 pixels in width x 678 pixels in
height and must be in the JPG format. Each screenshot's file size must
not exceed 384KB. Each screenshot should be the same size (each is
automatically scaled to match the aspect ratio of the above dimensions),
and it is preferable to name screenshots sequentially, for example
fluffy-puppies-01.jpg, fluffy-puppies-02.jpg, and so on.

Make sure your icons, images, descriptions, and tags are free of
profanity or other offensive material.

During the publication process, you upload your app's individual plugin
WAR files and module JAR files along with the app's metadata (name,
description, version, icon, etc.).

\subsection{Additional Requirements for Themes/Site
Templates}\label{additional-requirements-for-themessite-templates}

Themes and Site Templates must include sample content and optionally
link to a demo website that provides context. This ensures a uniform
experience for Marketplace users: they download a Theme or Site Template
from Marketplace, install it, go to Sites or Site Templates in the
Control Panel, and immediately see the Theme or Site Template in action.

\noindent\hrulefill

\textbf{Important:} Demo sites must be valid. Demo website, Theme, and
Site Template sample content must not plagiarize or infringe on
copyrights.

\noindent\hrulefill

The
\href{/docs/7-2/frameworks/-/knowledge_base/f/importing-resources-with-a-theme}{Resources
Importer} includes files and web content that imports automatically into
Liferay on Theme and Site Template deployment. Use the Resources
Importer to include files/web content to provide a sample context for
your Theme or Site Template. The
\href{/docs/7-2/frameworks/-/knowledge_base/f/themes-introduction}{Themes
tutorials} provide details.

\section{Packaging Your Marketplace
App}\label{packaging-your-marketplace-app}

Liferay apps are ``normal'' Liferay plugins with additional information
about them. Therefore, most of the requirements are the same as those
that exist for other Liferay plugins, as explained in the tutorials on
creating
\href{/docs/7-2/appdev/-/knowledge_base/a/liferay-mvc-portlet}{Liferay
MVC Portlets}.

In addition to those requirements, there are some Marketplace-specific
ones to keep in mind:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \textbf{Target the Appropriate Java JRE}: Regardless of the tools you
  use to develop your app, your app's bytecode must be compatible with
  the target Java JRE for your version of Liferay. Apps are rejected if
  their bytecode is not compatible with the Java JRE for the intended
  version of Liferay. In the Compatibility Matrix for your Liferay
  version, make sure your app's bytecode is compatible with the latest
  certified Java JDK version.

  If you use any Gradle-based build environment like
  \href{/docs/7-2/reference/-/knowledge_base/r/liferay-workspace}{Liferay
  Workspace}, make sure your \texttt{targetCompatibility} is set to the
  latest certified Java JDK version.

  Similarly, if you use Maven, you can set the bytecode compatibility
  like this:
\end{itemize}

\begin{verbatim}
<properties>
    <maven.compiler.source>1.8</maven.compiler.source>
    <maven.compiler.target>1.8</maven.compiler.target>  
</properties>
\end{verbatim}

If you use the
\href{/docs/6-2/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/t/plugins-sdk}{Liferay
Plugins SDK} to develop your app for Liferay Portal 6.2 or 6.1, you can
set the Java version by overriding the \texttt{ant.build.javac.target}
property in the Plugins SDK's \texttt{build.properties} file.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{WAR (\texttt{.war}) files}:

  \begin{itemize}
  \item
    WAR files must contain a
    \texttt{WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.properties} file.
  \item
    WAR files must not contain any
    \texttt{WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.xml} file.
  \item
    WAR file names must not contain any commas.
  \item
    WAR file names must conform to the following naming convention:

    \emph{context\_name}\texttt{-}\emph{plugin\_type}\texttt{-A.B.C.D.war}

    Where:
  \item
    \emph{context\_name}: Alpha-numeric (including \texttt{-} and
    \texttt{\_}) short name of your app. This name is used as the
    deployment context, and must not duplicate any other app's context
    (you'll be warned if you use a context name of any other app on the
    Marketplace).
  \item
    \emph{plugin\_type}: one of the following: \texttt{hook},
    \texttt{layouttpl}, \texttt{portlet}, \texttt{theme}, or
    \texttt{web}.
  \item
    \texttt{A.B.C.D}: The four digit version of your WAR file. Four
    digits must be used.

    Example: \texttt{myapp-portlet-1.0.0.0.war}
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \textbf{\texttt{WEB-INF/}\href{https://docs.liferay.com/ce/portal/7.1-latest/propertiesdoc/liferay-plugin-package_7_1_0.properties.html}{\texttt{liferay-plugin-package.properties}}
  file:}

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Property \texttt{recommended.deployment.context} must not be set.
  \item
    Setting property \texttt{security-manager-enabled} to \texttt{true}
    is mandatory for all paid apps that contain WAR-style plugins and
    that are for 6.1 EE/CE GA3 and 6.2 EE/CE; the setting is optional
    for free apps. Setting this property to \texttt{true} enables
    Liferay's Plugin Security Manager. If you're enabling the security
    manager, you must also define your Portal Access Control List (PACL)
    in this file. Read
    \href{/docs/6-2/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/t/plugin-security-and-pacl}{Plugins
    Security and PACL} for information on developing secure apps.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \textbf{Deployment contexts}:

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Liferay reserves the right to deny an application if any of its
    plugin deployment contexts is the same as a context of another
    plugin in the Marketplace.
  \item
    Liferay reserves the right to replace app plugin WAR files that have
    the same deployment context as plugins built by Liferay.
  \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

There are some additional requirements for uploading Liferay DXP 7.x and
Liferay Portal CE 7.x apps:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{OSGi modules in JAR (\texttt{.jar}) files}:

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    The manifest file must at minimum contain the following manifest
    headers:

    \begin{itemize}
    \tightlist
    \item
      \texttt{Bundle-SymbolicName}: a unique name for the module
    \item
      \texttt{Bundle-Version}: the module's version
    \item
      \texttt{Web-ContextPath}: the servlet context path
    \end{itemize}
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \textbf{Apps containing multiple file types:}

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Liferay DXP 7.x and Liferay Portal CE 7.x apps can contain a mix of
    WAR-based plugins and OSGi JAR-based plugins. Regardless of file
    type, each plugin must be able to run on Liferay DXP 7.x and Liferay
    Portal CE 7.x.
  \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

\noindent\hrulefill

\textbf{Important:} If you're developing a paid app or want your free
app to satisfy Plugin Security Manager on Liferay 6.2 or 6.1 GA3, make
sure to specify PACLs for your traditional WAR-style plugins. See the
article
\href{/docs/6-2/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/t/plugin-security-and-pacl}{Plugin
Security and PACL} for details. Give yourself adequate time to develop
your app's permission descriptors and time to test your app thoroughly
with the security manager enabled.

\noindent\hrulefill

Apps usually consist of multiple plugins (e.g., multiple WAR or JAR
files) and plugin types. In addition, you may want to consider how to
package your app for running on different Liferay versions.

\subsection{Considering Package Variations to Target Different Versions
of
Liferay}\label{considering-package-variations-to-target-different-versions-of-liferay}

Apps can be written to work across many different versions of Liferay.
For example, suppose you want to publish version 1.0 of your app, which
you're supporting on Liferay Portal 6.1 and 6.2. Due to
incompatibilities between these Liferay versions, it may be impossible
to create a single binary WAR or JAR file that works across both Liferay
versions. In this case, you must compile your app twice: once against
Liferay Portal 6.1 and once against 6.2, producing two different
\emph{packages} (also called variations) of your version 1.0 app. Each
package has the same functionality, but they're different files. You can
upload such packages to support your app on different Liferay versions.
Packages are sometimes referred to as files that make up your app.

Now that you've prepared your app's files and specified its metadata,
it's time to submit it to Liferay for publishing on the Marketplace!

\chapter{Submitting Your App}\label{submitting-your-app}

Now that you have everything in order for publishing your app, you can
start the Marketplace app submission process.

Go to your \emph{Account Home} on
\href{http://www.liferay.com}{liferay.com}. In the left side navigation
panel of your profile page, there are links to pages related to using
apps and developing apps. Links to \emph{Apps} and \emph{Metrics} appear
in the \emph{Development} section of the navigation panel. You'll use
these links heavily during development, so you may want to bookmark this
page too. Click \emph{Apps} from the \emph{Development} section to
access your app development page.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/marketplace-my-app-manager.png}
\caption{Your app development page lists the apps you've developed and
enables you to add new apps for publishing to the Marketplace.}
\end{figure}

Now that you know how to get to your app development page, you can
submit your app! It involves,

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/specify-your-apps-initial-details}{Specifying
  your app's initial details}
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/uploading-your-app}{Uploading
  your app}
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/creating-your-licensing-and-pricing-model}{Creating
  your licensing and pricing model}
\item
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/submitting-your-app-for-review}{Submitting
  your app for review}
\end{itemize}

To begin the process of publishing your app, click \emph{Add New App}.
The app wizard appears, so that you can fill in your app's details.

\section{Specifying Your App's Initial
Details}\label{specifying-your-apps-initial-details}

From this screen you enter your app's basic details. Previous articles
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/planning-your-apps-distribution}{Planning
Your App's Distribution} and
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/preparing-your-app}{Preparing
Your App} helped prepare you for filling in these details.

The top portion of the app wizard's initial screen is shown in the
figure below.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/marketplace-add-app-details.png}
\caption{The app wizard lets you add details about your app, an icon,
and screen shots. Scroll down further to see options for specifying
relevant URLs, adding tags, and specifying the editions of Liferay that
your app supports.}
\end{figure}

Here are descriptions of this screen's fields:

\textbf{App Owner:} Choose to whom the app ``belongs'' once it is
uploaded--either yourself (personal) or a company. If you'd like to
submit on behalf of a company, click \emph{Create a company} to go to
the \emph{Join A Company} page. From this page, search to see if your
company already exists in the Liferay Marketplace. If you wish to
publish your app on behalf of your company, but your company does not
yet have a Marketplace profile, register your company by clicking
\emph{Register My Company}, filling out the registration form, and
submitting the form.

\textbf{App Pricing:} Choose whether you want the app to be free or
paid. If you choose paid, you'll have the option to specify pricing and
licensing details later in the submission process.

Importantly, you can't change the app from free to paid or from paid to
free once the app is published to the Marketplace. In order to offer the
app in the other license type, you must submit another app under a
different name (title). If you wish to have both free and paid licenses
for your app, you must submit the app under one name for free licenses
and submit it under another name for paid licenses. Make sure to select
the license type (i.e., free or paid) that's best for your app.

\textbf{Title:} Name of your application.

\textbf{Description:} Like the name says, this is a description of your
app. You can put anything you want here, but a good guideline is no more
than 4-5 paragraphs. This field does not allow any markup tags or other
textual adornments--it's just text.

\textbf{Localized:} Selecting this displays an \emph{Add Translation}
button that lets you denote translations your app provides.

\textbf{Icon:} Upload an icon image to represent your app.

\textbf{Screen Captures:} Upload one or more screenshots of your app.
The screenshots you upload here are displayed in a carousel of rotating
images when your app is viewed on the Marketplace.

\textbf{Category:} Choose the Marketplace category that most accurately
describes what your app does. Users looking for specific types of apps
often browse categories by clicking on a specific category name in the
main Marketplace home page. Having your app listed under the appropriate
category helps them find your app.

\textbf{Developer Website URL:} This is a URL that should reference the
web site associated with the development of the app. For open source
apps, this typically points at the project site where the source is
maintained. For others, links to a home page of information about this
app would be appropriate.

\textbf{Support URL:} This is a URL that should reference a location
where your app's purchasers or users can get support.

\textbf{Documentation URL:} What better way to showcase the amazing
capabilities of your app than to have a live, running version of it for
potential buyers to see and use? This field can house a URL pointing to
something as exciting as that and/or documentation for using your app.

\textbf{API Reference URL:} This is a URL that should reference your
app's API documentation (e.g., Javadoc).

\textbf{Source Code URL:} If you'd to provide a link to the source code
of your app, do so here.

\textbf{Labs:} You can denote an app as experimental by checking the
appropriate box.

\textbf{Security:} If your app is only for Liferay 7.0 or later, or does
not contain WAR-style plugins, or does \emph{not} use Liferay's PACL
Security Manager, check the appropriate box. Otherwise, enable the
security manager in your app by including the setting
\texttt{security-manager-enabled=true} in the
\href{http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/propertiesdoc/liferay-plugin-package_6_2_0.properties.html}{\texttt{liferay-plugin-package.properties}}
file in your plugin WAR files.

\textbf{Tags:} A set of descriptive words that categorize your app.
These tags are free-form and can help potential purchasers find your app
through keyword searches, tag clouds, and other search mechanisms. You
can click on \emph{Suggestions} to let Marketplace suggest some tags for
you based on the data you've already entered. Click \emph{Select} to
select from existing tags, or you can manually type in new tags.

\textbf{EULA:} You can use the default end user license agreement (EULA)
or provide your own. There's a link to the minimum terms which custom
EULAs must satisfy.

Remember to visit the articles
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/planning-your-apps-distribution}{Planning
Your App's Distribution} and
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/preparing-your-app}{Preparing
Your App} for information to help you decide how best to fill in many of
these fields.

Once you've entered all your app's details, click \emph{Next} to get to
the screen for uploading your app's files.

\section{Uploading Your App}\label{uploading-your-app}

On this screen, you must specify your app's version and upload your
app's files. Note that the article
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/planning-your-apps-distribution}{Planning
Your App's Distribution} helps you plan your app's versioning scheme.
Likewise, the article
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/preparing-your-app}{Preparing
Your App} helps you determine which files to upload.

To start uploading, click \emph{Browse} and select the files that make
up your app. Each time you add a file, it automatically begins to upload
and its compatibility information is scanned. You must upload at least
one file before advancing beyond this screen. Once the files are
successfully uploaded, a check mark appears next to each plugin, and the
plugins are displayed based on their compatibility information.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/marketplace-app-version-and-upload-files.png}
\caption{Specify a set of files for each Liferay version you wish to
support.}
\end{figure}

If you selected \emph{Free} for your app pricing, click \emph{Next} to
advance to the final screen. If you selected \emph{Paid}, you'll be
presented with additional options for licensing and pricing your app.

\section{Creating Your Licensing and Pricing
Model}\label{creating-your-licensing-and-pricing-model}

Carefully consider which licensing structure best meets your needs. Once
your app has been approved, these options, except for price updates,
cannot be changed.

\textbf{Choose a license term:}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/marketplace-configure-app-license.png}
\caption{Choosing license terms for Marketplace apps is easy.}
\end{figure}

Choosing \emph{Perpetual} allows the app to continue running without
expiration. Choosing \emph{Non-Perpetual} expires the app's license one
year from the purchase date. Perpetual License also allows you to offer
Support Services, which the customer must renew annually to maintain
access to app updates and support. If you choose not to offer Support
Services with a Perpetual License, customers will be provided with app
updates only, whenever updates are available.

Importantly, you can't change your app's license terms (perpetual or
non-perpetual) once the app is approved. In order to release an approved
app under a different license term you must submit another app under a
new name (title). So make sure you think through the license term that
makes the most sense for your app.

\textbf{Creating license options:}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/marketplace-create-license-types.png}
\caption{You can create multiple license options for your Marketplace
apps.}
\end{figure}

Creating license options allows you to design license bundles and to
specify discounts for customers who purchase more Liferay Instances for
your app (a Liferay Instance or Instance refers to a single installation
of the Liferay Portal). Also you can designate different pricing for
Standard Licenses vs. Developer Licenses. You must specify at least one
license option, but no more than 10 options per type. You'll price these
options on the next page.

You can add or remove bundles (quantities) of your app's license type
even after the app is approved. You must however, always honor any
support agreements you have with current customers that are using
bundles you've removed.

\textbf{Paid support:} You can offer additional paid support services
for your app. If you select this option, customers can contact you with
support requests and are entitled to regular updates.

Once an app that offers a support subscription offering is approved, you
can't remove that support subscription offering. You can however, add a
support subscription offering to an approved app.

\textbf{Offer a trial:} You can offer a free 30-day trial of your app,
restricted to one Instance and 25 users.

When you're finished selecting all the options for your license, proceed
to the next page to determine the app's pricing and availability.

\textbf{Pricing:}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/marketplace-app-pricing.png}
\caption{Liferay makes it easy to price your app's license types and
specify their availability to countries around the world.}
\end{figure}

Based on your selections from the previous page, you'll have price
fields for each license option and for any support option you offered.

When you have completed your app's pricing and availability, click
\emph{Next} to advance to the app preview screen.

\section{Submitting Your App For
Review}\label{submitting-your-app-for-review}

The \emph{App Preview} screen lets you preview your app as it will
appear on the Marketplace. If you want to change things before finally
submitting your app, click \emph{Edit} to go back and continue making
changes until you're satisfied.

Before finalizing your app's submission, make sure that you're pleased
with the values you've set for the following app details, as these
details can't be modified once the app is approved:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Free vs.~paid
\item
  License term (perpetual vs.~non-perpetual)
\item
  Support subscription offering (cannot be removed)
\end{itemize}

Once you are satisfied, click \emph{Submit for Review}.

At this point, the Liferay Marketplace staff starts to review your app
and test it. If you need to make changes to your app during its review
or if you're curious about the rigors of the review process, make sure
to read the next section of this guide.

\chapter{Understanding the App Review
Process}\label{understanding-the-app-review-process}

The Liferay Marketplace app QA/review process begins as soon as you
submit your app for review. Every third-party app submitted to the
Liferay Marketplace is reviewed by our team to ensure that certain
standards for information are upheld and the app installs as expected.
\emph{Liferay cannot, however, be a substitute for your own testing and
debugging team}. Ultimately, you must test, refine, and ensure that your
app functions as promised and performs as expected.

\noindent\hrulefill

\textbf{Note:} Liferay is not responsible for the behavior (or
misbehavior) of apps on the Marketplace. For details regarding this,
consult the \emph{Liferay Marketplace User Agreement}, \emph{Liferay
Marketplace Developer Agreement}, and the individual \emph{End User
License Agreements} associated with each app.

\noindent\hrulefill

Once you've submitted your app for review, your app's status changes as
it moves through the review process. We email you on status changes and
provide as much detail as we can if we discover potential issues with
your app. Overall, we don't want our app review process to feel like a
barrier or a black box. We love having new apps in the Marketplace, and
we try to be as helpful as we can throughout the approval process!

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/app_review_process.png}
\caption{Liferay informs you at every step during the QA/review
process.}
\end{figure}

If you submit an updated version of a previously approved app, you'll
see these statuses: Approved (Version Unsubmitted), Approved (Version
Pending), Approved (Version Pending QA), and Approved (Version Denied).

The app review process consists of \textbf{Two Major Phases}:

\phantomsection\label{article-33460874}
Review Phase

Est. Time Frame

App metadata review

Our team reviews your app's metadata to confirm that titles,
descriptions, images, etc. are appropriate.

\textasciitilde1 week

App QA test

Liferay ensures that apps meet a minimal set of requirements:

Passes anti-virus scan

Deploys successfully on standard Liferay supported
environments/platforms without errors.

Basic functionality ``smoke'' test.

Liferay does not do source code review and does not ask for your source
code. Further, Liferay is not responsible for the behavior (or
misbehavior) of apps on the Marketplace. Please consult the Liferay
Marketplace User Agreement, Liferay Marketplace Developer Agreement, and
the individual End User License Agreements associated with each app.

\textasciitilde1-2 weeks

\textbf{Our QA Test Environments} are summarized below. At a minimum,
test your app against these environments prior to submission. If
technical reasons prevent your app from running on certain platforms
(e.g., app server-specific issues), specify compatibility in the app
description and documentation so that our review team can exclude
certain test conditions, if necessary.

\phantomsection\label{article-33460919}
Liferay Version

6.x

7.0.x

7.1.x

7.2.x

7.3.x

Operating Systems

Ubuntu 11x and Windows 10 x64

Database

MySQL 5.5.x

MySQL 5.6.x

MySQL 5.7.x

Application Server *

Tomcat 7

Tomcat 8

Tomcat 9

JDK

Oracle JDK 6, 7

Oracle JDK 8 / JDK 11 (7.1 and higher)

Browser

Chrome

\textbf{*} You can request certification on additional, optional
application servers. For Liferay 7.x, Wildfly 10 is available. For
Liferay 6.x, Glassfish 3.1 and an appropriate JBoss version are
available. Please add the request in the app submission panel's
\emph{Note to testers} section.

Once your app is approved by Marketplace staff, you'll get email
notification. When your app is approved, it is made available on
Marketplace. The app also appears on your public Profile page, which
lists all apps that you or your company developed and published.

If your app is rejected, you receive an email explaining the reasons for
rejection. You can then make the requested changes and re-submit the app
for approval.

After you've successfully published your app, you might get all kinds of
feedback from users and yourself about what's right and wrong with it.
The next article explores how to make changes once you have published
your app.

\chapter{Managing Your Published App}\label{managing-your-published-app}

You've launched your new app on the Marketplace. Congratulations! As you
settle down from your launch celebration, you might wonder how your app
is performing in the Marketplace. Is there a way to monitor how many
people are viewing it and downloading it? And what about those features
that didn't make this release? How difficult is it to upload your app's
next version with those features? Don't sweat it. The Liferay
Marketplace and app wizard are here to help.

You can track app performance. Marketplace shows app trends like views,
downloads, and purchases. You can upload new versions of your app and
make changes to some of its details with the App Wizard. Read on to
learn how all of this works.

\section{Tracking App Performance}\label{tracking-app-performance}

One of the main reasons for developing and publishing apps on
Marketplace is to drive app downloads and adoption. Marketplace gives
you detailed reports on views, downloads, and purchases of your app(s).
To access these metrics, navigate to \emph{Account Home} →
\emph{Metrics} (under \emph{Development}).

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{./images/marketplace-app-metrics-over-time.png}
\caption{The App Performance view in Marketplace lets you see how many
times your apps have been viewed, downloaded, and purchased over a time
interval.}
\end{figure}

The view shown above is the default metrics view for a developer's apps.
Across the bottom is a list of data series options (\emph{Views},
\emph{Downloads}, or \emph{Purchases}). At the top, you set a date
range. In the middle, a graph shows the data within the date range.
Finally, the graphed data is also shown in tabular format, in case you
want to know the exact values making up the graph. The different types
of data available to view are described below.

\subsection{Views}\label{views}

When someone searches or browses the Marketplace, they click on apps to
see their details. When this occurs for an app, Marketplace records a
\emph{View} for it. When you select \emph{Views} in the App Metrics
screen, the app view count over time appears. The App Metrics screen
shows \emph{Views} by default. The number of possible views per day per
user is unlimited.

\subsection{Downloads}\label{downloads}

Marketplace records a \emph{Download} for your app when someone
downloads any package of any version of your app. The number of possible
downloads per day per user is unlimited.

\subsection{Purchases}\label{purchases}

The Marketplace counts app purchases too.

As you see areas to improve your app or when necessary changes come up,
you can make changes to your published app. The next article describes
changes you can make.

\section{Making Changes to Published
Apps}\label{making-changes-to-published-apps}

You can make these kinds of changes during the life of your published
app:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Edit your app details (e.g., description, icon, etc.)
\item
  Add new license bundles (quantities)
\item
  Edit app prices of bundles
\item
  Modify regional availability
\item
  Add support for a new version of Liferay
\item
  Release a new version of your app to fix bugs or offer new
  functionality
\item
  Disable your app
\end{itemize}

Your currently approved app remains available while you're submitting
changes and while Liferay reviews and tests your app changes.

The rest of this article describes each kind of change.

\subsection{Editing Your App's
Metadata}\label{editing-your-apps-metadata}

App metadata includes the name, description, icon, screenshots, and
other information you supplied during the app creation process. Here's
how to edit your app's metadata:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Navigate to \emph{Account Home} → \emph{Development} → \emph{Apps}. A
  listing of your published apps appears.
\item
  Select the app you wish to edit. This screen shows you what the app
  looks like on Marketplace.
\item
  Click the \emph{Edit} button at the bottom of the preview. Now you can
  edit details and add new files to the your existing version of your
  app. The current values as they appear in your app pre-populate the
  form.
\item
  Make any changes as needed on this screen.
\item
  Click \emph{Next}. If you don't need to edit any more variations, you
  can continue clicking \emph{Next} until you reach the final preview
  screen.
\item
  Click \emph{Submit for Review} to submit your changes for review.
\end{enumerate}

All changes must go through the submission process. If your app revision
only consists of metadata changes, it need only go through the
\href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/understanding-the-app-review-process}{\emph{App
metadata review}} phase of the review process.

Once approved, the changes you request appear for your app on the
Marketplace.

\subsection{Editing App Prices}\label{editing-app-prices}

You can change your app's prices, add or remove bundles, and modify
regional availability for a variety of reasons, whether it's to run a
promotional offer, or to adjust your pricing model to better account for
app demand. Here's how to edit app prices:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Navigate to \emph{Company Profile Home} → \emph{Apps}. A listing of
  your published apps appears.
\item
  Select the app you wish to edit.
\item
  At the bottom, click \emph{Edit} → \emph{Pricing}.
\item
  Edit your app's prices.
\item
  When you've finished editing your app's prices, click \emph{Next} and
  save your app.
\end{enumerate}

These changes do not require Liferay verification process to approve.
The changes show immediately.

You cannot however, modify the following attributes of an approved app:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Free vs.~paid
\item
  License term (perpetual vs.~non-perpetual)
\item
  Support subscription offering (cannot be removed)
\end{itemize}

Next, you can consider adding support for new versions of Liferay.

\subsection{Adding Support for New Versions of
Liferay}\label{adding-support-for-new-versions-of-liferay}

If you must add files to support another Liferay release, the process is
similar to editing an app.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Navigate to \emph{Account Home} → \emph{Apps}. A listing of your
  published apps appears.
\item
  Select the app you wish to edit.
\item
  Click the \emph{Edit} button to edit that app.
\item
  Click \emph{Next} to advance past the details screen (make any
  necessary changes). The version edit screen appears.
\item
  Click \emph{Next} to advance past the version edit screen (you can't
  actually edit the version number of an already-approved version, but
  you can edit the ``What's New'' information). The File Upload screen
  appears.

  This screen should look familiar---it's the same workflow used when
  you initially created your app! The difference is that you can't edit
  pre-approved files for specific Liferay releases. You can only add
  \emph{new} files for a different Liferay release (if you must update
  existing files, you must create a new version of the app---see the
  later section on adding versions for details on how to do this).
\item
  Upload your new files (ensuring that your new plugins have updated
  compatibility information: see the
  \href{/how-to-publish/-/knowledge_base/publish/preparing-your-app}{Marketplace
  App Metadata Guidelines} for details on versions).
\item
  Click \emph{Next}, and observe the newly-added files listed at the
  bottom of the preview screen.
\item
  Click \emph{Submit for Review} to submit your requested change (adding
  files).
\end{enumerate}

Liferay reviews the files, and once approved, the new package becomes
available for download in the Marketplace.

\subsection{Releasing a New Version of your
App}\label{releasing-a-new-version-of-your-app}

As time passes, you may wish to add new functionality to your app or fix
a batch of bugs. This can be accomplished by releasing a new version of
your app. New versions offer your users new functionality and bug fixes,
and users are generally encouraged to use the latest version. In
addition, when a new version of your app becomes available, Marketplace
notifies existing users.

New versions of your apps are created in a similar fashion to creating
new apps.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Navigate to \emph{Account Home} → \emph{Apps}. A listing of your
  published apps appears.
\item
  Select the app you wish to edit.
\item
  Click the \emph{Edit} button to edit that app. The Details screen
  appears.
\item
  At the bottom of the Details screen, click the \emph{Add New Version}
  button. The process of adding a new version begins, starting with the
  App Details screen. Data from the current version of the app
  pre-populates the screen.

  You can modify the screen's pre-populated data. Since this is a new
  version of an existing app, making major changes (such as completely
  changing the name or description) might unsettle existing users.
  Uploading new screenshots and refreshing app icons is common. Note
  that you cannot change the app owner (such as moving from a
  personally-developed app to a company-developed app).
\item
  Click \emph{Next} until you get to the \emph{Add App Version} screen.
\item
  Specify a new version name for this version of your app.
\item
  Add \emph{What's New} text (optional). Common changes to mention are
  new features and bug fix information.
\item
  Click \emph{Next}. The file upload screen appears.
\item
  Upload the files associated with the new version of the app. You must
  upload all files for all supported Liferay versions again, even if
  they have not changed since the last version of your app.
\item
  Continue clicking \emph{Next} until you reach the final preview
  screen.
\item
  Click \emph{Submit for Review} to submit the new version of your app
  for review.
\end{enumerate}

The Liferay Marketplace staff starts to review your app's new version
and test it.

\subsection{Deactivating Your App}\label{deactivating-your-app}

When the time comes to retire your app, you can \emph{Deactivate} it.
Deactivating an app makes it unavailable to new customers, and it
doesn't appear in any public Marketplace listings. Existing customers
that have already downloaded your app can continue downloading the
legacy versions of the app they have already acquired, but they can't
download any versions they've not already received. The app remains in
your inventory, with all of its history, in case you choose to
re-activate or reference it.

Here's how to deactivate your app:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Navigate to \emph{Account Home} → \emph{Apps}. A listing of your
  published apps appears.
\item
  Select the app you wish to deactivate.
\item
  Click the \emph{Deactivate} button.
\end{enumerate}

In this set of articles, we looked at how to create, publish, maintain,
and track Liferay Marketplace apps. You can do this through the App
Manager that's available on your \emph{Account Home} page on
\href{http://liferay.com}{liferay.com} (liferay.com) account required!).
We covered requirements for publishing variations of your apps for
different versions of Liferay. Next, we showed how you can publish an
app on the Marketplace and how you can modify the app as it evolves.
Finally, we looked at tracking app adoption using view, download, and
install metrics.
